If they were actually going to be here, I could put them off.
That's fine.
I've read the book, so what we need is a really refreshing change of pace.
I've got tons of notes on it.
Of course, it's hard to interview somebody when you're already with them.
But tell me, I just did a PW interview with James Carroll in his new memoir.
Is it about his father?
It's about his father.
Of course, this is a father he knew.
You know, his father recently died.
He was an adult, and this is kind of different.
You're searching for a father he really didn't know at all, I guess.
Or I knew in a... In an untruthful way, I guess.
Or a fabricated way.
Or some of the ways that I knew him were very intense and very real.
So that it seems to me the real part of my father was the part that I knew as a child.
That was the part where he wasn't lying and wasn't faking.
in his love for me and his ability to be with a child.
One of the wonderful things that's happened, and it hasn't been a wholly pleasant journey, as you can imagine, but the few people who are alive who remember my father mostly remember him as children.
And they all have absolutely magic memories of him.
The stepson, for instance, is an amazing story.
I'm just trying to define the forces that moved you to pursue this thing.
And to write it in a memoir, too.
Well, because his story is much too unreal to put into fiction.
Everybody would say, this character is not believable.
What's your problem?
I think I decided that I needed to do it in the process of writing.
I began with an image of my grandmother's house.
I didn't think I was writing about my father.
I thought I was writing about my grandmother's house.
And I realized that what I was really writing about was the terrible shock of losing my father, going from the house or the apartment where we had lived, to the place which would mark the shape of the rest of my life, which was without him.
And in writing about that house, I realized I was writing about my father's death.
And then I had more to write about my father's death
Suddenly I had about 100 pages about my father's death.
And I said, oh, okay, it's time now to find out the stuff which I always could have looked for.
At any earlier time, I could have looked and I didn't.
And how old were you?
You give it to me in the book.
When I started.
Yeah, when you actually started the investigation, which is what it is.
You become a detective here.
Well, 1992, so I was 43.
Mm-hmm.
How old was your father when he died?
He was 62.
Had he lived longer and, you know, to your teens, what do you think?
I always think that... Would you have had this mythical image of him or you think you would have unmasked him, so to speak, in life?
I don't think so.
I think I would have been unable to distance myself from him because he was a very...
seductive figure, not only to me, but to many other people.
And I think I'd be an enormously different, possibly crazy person.
But I think I would have been, when I imagined what I would have been with Adam, I imagine myself very much under his spell.
What was the greatest shock for you to find, I mean, the anti-Semitism, the fact that the circumstances of his birth?
I'm just wondering, it just seems like there was one shocking
and I hate to use the word revelation, but it does seem that it almost takes on that quality.
I think I've known about the anti-Semitism for a while, so that wasn't shocking.
And also the atmosphere in which I grew up was so anti-Semitic, that in a way that wasn't shocking.
Two things were most shocking to me, in a way they both had to do with language and writing.
I was very shocked to know that he had another language, Yiddish,
that he never shared with me.
And that, I felt, was his greatest betrayal of me, not to have shared that language with me.
You'd like to have that language?
Yes, yes.
So I didn't have the language of his childhood, and that felt like a great betrayal.
Also, what I had to learn and to come to terms with, and I'm still not there completely, is I always thought that he was a really good writer.
And as a professional writer yourself, this has to be really... I'm sorry to interrupt.
No, no, you're right.
And as I read more and more of the stuff, one of the funny stories, because my, you know, one self... Even when you think you're stripped of self-deception, there's always a layer of self-deception that doesn't want to go.
And I thought that I was really confronting...
everything, and I wrote a chapter, the chapter about his writing was originally 120 pages long, and it was full of excerpts of his writing, which I still, up to two years ago, thought were just wonderful.
But when was the last time you had read it?
I hadn't read it for 20 years.
But even two years ago, I was still saying this is the beginning.
But you hadn't read it for only 20 years.
My point is, it's like going back to read Thomas Wolfe,
at this age, you know.
It's not as good as it was when we were kids and we read it for the first time.
That's my feeling, but I don't know if it's... But I was still holding on to that.
I gave him this 120-page chapter, and finally my agent said to me, you know, nobody's interested in his writing.
It's true.
It's not very good.
We're interested in hearing you talk about his writing.
And that was a terrible moment for me.
when somebody said, you're a better writer than he is.
Why was it terrible for you, though?
Did you want him to be better than you?
I did want him to be better than me.
Yeah.
I'm looking for the follow-up on that, but why?
That's all part of the... Because I think one of the hardest, what the real rite of passage of this novel was, was that I had to give up
my identity as primarily a daughter.
And in a way, it's a more comfortable position to say, you know, I am the daughter of the great man than I'm the daughter who has surpassed her father.
That involves guilt, whereas the other, you know, I could imagine it would involve resentment.
But you feel kind of protected.
by the great one who went before you.
But if you have to say, I stepped over him.
I noticed when you decide to name your son after your father, your husband said, you really want to do this?
He's mad and he's evil.
And you say, and you still name your son.
So there's almost a reluctance here on your part to cut him loose.
And I don't finally want to cut him loose.
I was trying to
The reason that I think if this book has wider significance for people who didn't have this odd biographical circumstance, what it's really about is how to keep the parent who is problematic.
That you don't have to completely reject that parent because they gave you a kind of love that was very formative and valuable.
To me, the challenge is to bear witness to my father's madness.
and also to bear witness to the good things that he gave me, and to say both are true, that he is a man whom I'm ashamed of and whom I love simultaneously.
How about the need to write for strangers?
I mean, there were strangers reading this.
It really is laying yourself bare.
I mean, you're almost exposing yourself in public.
It has to be very painful.
It was very painful, but it would have been worse not to do it.
Because it was so urgent.
It didn't feel like a choice.
It felt like a necessity.
I mean, is it a sense of confession on your part?
I think it was more a sense of exploration.
And since I'm a writer, I had to do it in writing.
So then what were my choices?
Either I publish it or I don't publish it.
And if it's good, why wouldn't I publish it?
Of course.
Everything for me has to be done through writing.
I asked Jim Carroll, you know, this and that.
I said, how do you feel having written this book?
And he said, I wish I could tell you I feel good.
Yeah.
He quoted his father.
Heartbreaking.
And I used this quote in my PW interview with him, which I think is in next week.
And how do you feel?
I mean, do you feel better for it?
I mean, do you feel...
I hate to use the word exorcism.
No, no, I don't think that you ever do exercise it.
You know, for me, because the shaping of it or the art of it is at least as much a part of it as the subject matter, there's a part of me that says, well, I did something I'm proud of.
In a sort of practical way, in the realm of actions,
My moving his grave was a very satisfying act to me and did give me a sense of change and closure.
And I don't think I would have had the courage to do that, because that was what everybody thought was really freaky and weird.
I don't think I would have had the courage to do that again unless it were, in a sense, part of a writing project.
So in a very almost primitive way, feeling that I'd moved his bones
to a place where he could be the head of a new dynasty and have his name on a stone.
That was of great comfort to me, and I felt like I had changed something and finished something.
He has figured so prominently in your fiction in various ways, and you suggest some of the ways in here, and I think even John Leonard in his piece, I thought, did you see it?
Yeah, that's great.
It was a piece, and of course,
He had to pat himself on the shoulder, having even seen this in final payments.
All right, having done this book now, and as a young woman with many books ahead of you.
Thanks.
Nice to hear you still think I'm young.
I just, at 52, published my first book last year, which is going into its fifth printing right now.
I'm pretty pleased about that.
In any case,
How do you see him affecting your work now, or do you see him not affecting your work?
You know, I think I'm finished with him as a subject.
And of course, having said that, I just realized, the minute you said that, I realized how he's figuring in a book that I'm just even now thinking about.
But I mean, in terms of the baggage that he's certainly, you've had to carry.
I think he'll, if he figures and when he figures, because I think you're right, he'll probably always figure, it will be
in a less idealized way.
You know, in one of our earlier interviews, you told me how difficult it was for you to deal with male sexuality.
Do you still feel that that will be the case?
I think it's... I haven't changed in the men's traditional male sexuality with all its sense of entitlement and all its sense of having the right to objectify
is something I don't understand and I never will.
I think I understand somewhat vexed male sexuality a little bit differently and a little bit better now.
That is to say, good men for whom sexuality is not just a panty raid or a tailgate party.
I think I understand that better.
Your mother is an offstage character here.
get to her towards the end.
I'll see where the question goes from here.
Your mother certainly has not affected you in any way like your father has.
Not really so.
Except that what my mother gave me, which is less easy to write about, but in some ways pervades my life, is she was a person of tremendous endurance and somebody who just believed in getting the job done.
and going forward.
And I think, you know, I see it in my students, the ones who will become writers and the ones who won't.
The crucial difference isn't just talent.
It's who can stick to it and who can get up in the morning and sit down and write, whether they feel like it or not.
And I think that part of me came from my mother.
Really?
Of course, the talent is important, isn't it?
Of course.
But there are so many who are talented.
that won't be able to harness it.
Well, what did your mother, do you feel that your mother and your, these women that you grew up with, what did they know about your father that they didn't, that they could have told you, do you think?
Nothing.
So they were in the same mythic envelope as, oh my God, sure.
But you do also suggest that they were
Your mother was happier, not happier, but he seemed relieved.
He must have been a real handful.
He was difficult to live with, really.
I think he was crazy.
And not only was he crazy, he was certainly not the 50s bourgeois ideal of the good provider.
And when I think about what my mother had to do, she was handicapped, she went off to work, she had no household help,
He was completely domestically incompetent, except that he did take care of me.
But she really worked like a horse.
And I think... And she didn't have to anymore.
Right.
Because then she just moved in and my grandmother did everything.
So it was a better deal for her.
You know, I think they were a great romance.
I think they really were a love match.
But I think that, like a lot of other people, it dissipated the friction of living together pretty quickly.
It's an amazing story.
It really is.
And I jotted down all these, you know, the dark side of the immigration story, which is, you know, you'd like to think there's this great, hopeful, triumphant kind of a story, and it just took a really, and you still don't have an answer, do you, for the why?
No.
The why still eludes you, doesn't it?
It's always going to be a dark.
Do you have any guesses?
You know, I have the speculations that I put in the speculative chapter, which is that it's about anti-Semitism.
It's about a family which seems, at best, chaotic.
But there were a lot of chaotic immigrant families.
Anti-Semitism was in the air for a lot of people.
Why, for example, didn't my father become a communist, like most other Jews?
in the 20s and 30s.
I don't know.
I think it was almost a kind of aesthetic that the Catholic Church represented for him that in some mysterious way seems to have been in his bones at a very early time.
And what put it there?
I don't know.
I love the story of you taking your 13-year-old daughter to the library and then she
I've been filing stories now by email, and I can't do it.
And my younger daughter comes in, and she's zing-zing with the mouse, and it's done.
And I look at her with absolute eye.
These kids are great.
They really are part of this.
And it was kind of nice that you brought your daughter into that.
Of course, what I didn't say was that she was completely hysterical laughing at me.
This feeling, I had to as one who spent, you know, uncounted hours on microfilm and archives, and people think this stuff can be dull, but it's amazing.
I can almost feel the goose pimples rising when you're saying,
where you're making this moment of discovery in the records.
And you almost don't want it to be true, especially where it involves you.
I've never done anything like that where it involves myself.
But just that moment when you find what you're looking for.
And the name, of course, is real.
And it changes when he's a young, very young.
They changed all the children's names.
So this had to have something to do with the parents as well that we don't know anything about.
And you would really like to know what caused this rejection.
And then a moment of archival horror is I'm at the files of the nursing home.
My grandmother's name is in the records.
There are all these files with the narrative history of the family, and my grandmother's isn't there.
Why?
And there's nothing.
What can I do?
There's nothing I can do about it.
Do you feel you've brought it as far as you can bring it now?
I think so.
And you're comfortable with it?
Yeah.
I mean, I'm comfortable that I've done everything I can do.
And I think, again, this is important.
I'm saying something important about the roots fantasy, which is that if you just get to the right record, you will find the story, and that all questions are answerable.
Well, one of the things about the past is that it's full of erasures and full of darkness, and we have to be able to tolerate that.
And in some ways, that's very, very painful.
It's even better to know a true, terrible story than to have to say, the past is gone.
It's not mine.
I can't have it.
I have no access to it.
And I think all these, you know, I mean, I don't know if you've ever done this, but in these kind of genealogical collections,
It's fascinating.
All race lines are crossed, class lines are crossed, age lines are crossed.
They're buzzing.
These libraries are just buzzing.
Oh, they're wonderful.
People are fascinated with trying to find out where they came from.
Was there a sense of anger at all with you?
No.
Were you mad at him when you were finding out these things?
I just deep pity.
You know what Jim Carroll says?
It's heartbreaking.
Yeah.
This is a genre that has really blossomed lately.
It's almost a brand new genre of writing.
Of course, I hate feeling like I'm part of a trend, but what can I do?
Well, I mean, the Mary Carr book I think of, which I thought was wonderful, and Jim's book, and that New York Times magazine piece pretty much established or identified it as a genre.
You say you don't like to be identified as being part of it.
I always hate that.
I like to think that everything I did was completely original, has nothing to do with anybody else.
Of course, that's not true.
But the memoir, the very personal memoir, this is quite a photograph.
Where did that one come from?
Just from our scrapbook, family scrapbook.
Pardon me for being a little spastic this morning.
I've been up since five.
And the name Mary Catherine, you know, that's hardly...
Oh, Father D is a very interesting story, isn't it?
And then your guess, pure guesswork, that your mother was desperately in love with him and he desperately in love with him.
Now, is this the fiction writer working, or is this?
Well, I look at photographs of my mother with him, and it looks like the face of a woman in love.
And then the way that he talked about my father to me and the letters that he wrote, I mean, that's quite a line, you know.
Don't complain to me.
You at least have a child of his loins.
I have nothing.
That sounds like love to me.
Yeah, sure, the loins is quite an image.
Do you hear his voice?
Can you hear his voice?
No.
I can hear him say two words.
Automobile and water.
And why those two words?
Because I think he said them in a way that wasn't New York.
He said automobile like automobile.
And he said, water, instead of water.
And I think the differentness... Was it mid-western, do you think, or middle?
He was too young, I guess.
Do you love him?
Oh, I do love him, yeah.
I do love him.
Well, that's important to point out.
I mean, this is not... You're not eviscerating him so much here, are you?
No.
I'm trying, as I said, simultaneously to bear witness and to keep him.
And...
Because I think in the end, that's what everybody has to do about a parent.
There are always going to be parts of your parents that are abhorrent, even in the most beloved parents.
And how do you maintain that balance between separating yourself and being able to say, I don't like that, and to keep the love and the gratitude and the enormous bond?
You don't feel betrayed?
No.
That line, I love you more than God, have you resolved for yourself whether he loved you more than God does or he loves you more than he loves God?
I don't know.
Probably both.
But that's a lot of weight to have to carry, too, isn't it, for a little girl?
On the other hand, it's sort of a good thing for a writer because it makes you think you're the most important person in the world.
Let's see what else I have to...
And then, of course, it is something that, oh, the library, isn't it?
I mean, you talk about, I mean, he has the fatal attack in the New York Public Library.
You talk about, I mean, you couldn't invent something like that, could you?
You see, if I put that in fiction, they'd say, oh, it's too corny.
I'm not going to compare this with Jim's book at all, but I mean, he said, if I were to write this as a novel,
You know, the priest, and he has a brother who's an FBI agent, another brother who's a draft dodger, who his brother has to find, basically.
And he's out demonstrating in front of the Pentagon, and his father's in there picking the targets.
They laugh me out of it.
Nobody would ever believe these stories.
And so, you know, go figure it out.
It is amazing, isn't it?
And it's so American, you know, that a child can go so far from...
or her parents, and yet still be connected in some way.
I know you've got another interview coming up in about five or ten minutes, so I'm not going to take up too much of your time.
I have the book, you know, which is the most important thing, and Jack Dinsmore.
You're Jack Dinsmore's daughter, right?
How does that come at you when you hear something like that?
Well, I loved that.
I like the Jack Dentons more part of him until it starts to turn anti-Semitic.
But, you know, the magazine was kind of stupid, but it was lively.
Embarrassing.
It was embarrassing, but it was lively.
It was fun.
And I think I'm like anything in life that's kind of on the side of fun.
Who was his audience, do you think, his target audience?
It was very successful.
It ran for 14 years, which is extraordinary for a humor magazine.
I think, again, his great model for that was Mencken, and that there was an audience for a kind of man, and I think it was almost exclusively male, who
And probably a lot of them were self-educated, longing for a culture that they didn't quite get, but wanting to say, we're not highfalutin.
We can laugh, we can have a drink with the guys down at the bar, but also in our rooms there's a copy of The Temptation of St.
Anthony.
And I think that was the audience.
And then I think there were probably just a lot of guys in Cleveland who wanted to look at pictures of girls.
And, of course, he taught you to read.
And he taught me French and Latin.
Also, he gave me what was very rare for a young girl growing up in the 50s.
He gave me complete permission to use my mind for the same freedom that a boy would have.
You know, he said I could do anything.
And gender was absolutely not in the discourse.
And you talk about ironies.
You know, you're a
dream as a child was to grow up and be his helper, I guess, almost his acolyte in a way.
And that wouldn't have happened had he lived, I'm sure, but you don't know.
It might have.
The capacity for self-delusion can be endless.
But again, I think as you grew older, you would have discovered things about him that maybe you would have.
You don't know that.
I could have, like a lot of people do with even a lot of abused children,
set up a universe in which the abuser is recast as a hero.
Because if that's what you really need, that's the best thing in your universe.
You recast it, in a way.
It is, I think, worth knowing that you've dealt with this through writing.
You haven't had to go see therapists or anything like that, as many people might have to, I would think, or many young women with fathers.
Whatever.
And so this writing certainly was therapeutic for you here, wasn't it?
In that way, yeah.
Would you sign a couple of books for me?
One for me and one for my editor.